# Codebook for the tidy dataset generated

## Columns in the tidy data set
In the tidy data set generated by our script, the following columns are available in the given order:

* activtity - STRING
* subject - INTEGER
* observation - STRING
* mean
* std (standard deviation)

Let us describe the columns now:

### Activity 
In the original data set, we have activity labelled by integer in the raw data. We have combined the activity labels from the given codebook files 
and mapped them to the strings as follows:

| ACTIVITY LABEL| VALUE IN ORIGINAL DATASET |
| ------------- |:-------------------------:|
| WALKING       |  1 |
| WALKING_UPSTAIRS     | 2 |
| WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS | 3 |
| SITTING | 4 |
| STANDING      | 5 |
| LAYING      | 6 |


### subject
This column is preserved as in the original dataset and corresponds to the id of the subject on whom the observation was recorded.

### observation
Our tidy dataset contains only variables for which the mean and standard observation was recorded. Other variables have been stripped from the data set.
Also, we have cleaned up the variables in the following way. Two observations which were listed as tBodyAcc-mean()-X and
tBodyAcc-std()-X have been normalized now as a single observations on tBodyAcc-X variable. 
Following is a complete list of 33 types of observations, which occur in this column
* "fBodyAccJerk-X"       
* "fBodyAccJerk-Y"       
* "fBodyAccJerk-Z"       
* "fBodyAccMag"         
* "fBodyAcc-X"           
* "fBodyAcc-Y"           
* "fBodyAcc-Z"           
* "fBodyBodyAccJerkMag" 
* "fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag" 
* "fBodyBodyGyroMag"     
* "fBodyGyro-X"          
* "fBodyGyro-Y"         
* "fBodyGyro-Z"          
* "tBodyAccJerkMag"      
* "tBodyAccJerk-X"       
* "tBodyAccJerk-Y"      
* "tBodyAccJerk-Z"       
* "tBodyAccMag"          
* "tBodyAcc-X"           
* "tBodyAcc-Y"          
* "tBodyAcc-Z"           
* "tBodyGyroJerkMag"     
* "tBodyGyroJerk-X"      
* "tBodyGyroJerk-Y"     
* "tBodyGyroJerk-Z"      
* "tBodyGyroMag"         
* "tBodyGyro-X"          
* "tBodyGyro-Y"         
* "tBodyGyro-Z"          
* "tGravityAccMag"       
* "tGravityAcc-X"        
* "tGravityAcc-Y"       
* "tGravityAcc-Z"      

### mean
This column contains the observation mean as defined in the original codebook. It is normalized to [-1,1].

### std 
This column contains the observation standard deviation as defined in the original codebook. It is normalized to [-1,1].

## Data cleaning and transformation
Following steps were performed to clean and transform the data set into a tidy dataset:
* adding subject and activity columns to the feature data
* mergin the test and training data
* The data was melt to obtain the one observation per column characteristic of a tidy data set.
* Using pattern matching, mean and std deviation were decast into a single row to obtain the "all variables of an observation in single row"
  characteristic of a tidy data set.

## How to run the scripts
Copy the file run_analysis.R to the directory containing the dataset. To be clear, there should be an unzipped directory "UCI HAR Dataset" present. Running the script
will produce two files:
* tidy_data.txt - A tidy set produced from the given data set
* tidy_data_agg.txt - Another tidy data set which calculates the mean aggregates for all the variable for each activity, subject and variable.


